representative from each of the organisations introduce your teams.
Cool.
So kia ora, Catherine Byrne, chief executive and registrar for the Nursing
Council.
Good day.
And it's a pleasure to introduce Nick Davis, who's our senior legal
advisor.
Thank you.
Kia ora. Michael Peat, chief executive of Pharmacy Council, and,
uh, Leonie Neser, CEO major, is our registrar.
Fabulous. And we've got three other friends here.
Gaye Friend-Garcia, legal advisor and deputy registrar for the Nursing
Council.
Nursing Council.
Yeah, I'm Martin Newman-Hall. I'm, uh, director of core business, which is a CRO
function of the Nursing Council.
Oh, got it.
Evelyn Low, manager of finance and performance, Pharmacy Council. Kia ora.
Fabulous. Thank you. Okay.
We have some correspondence with each of your
organizations. We'll start with the Nursing Council.
Just want to dig into first,
the way that the APC and the disciplinary fee has
been set in this financial term.
What you've written back to the committee might be a good place to start,
and to explain the differences between those fees, why we have a
disciplinary fee, and the APC itself.
Well, thank you, and thank you for the committee for the opportunity to appear and
answer questions.
So in terms of the-- We charge an APC fee.
It's $130, and that is an annual practicing certificate fee
that all nurses pay.
The
breakdown is that we have a general portion of that fee and a disciplinary
levy. The general part of the fee is contained in legislation,
as is the disciplinary levy. The disciplinary levy funds
only the functions of the Professional Conduct Committee, so our disciplinary
investigations, disciplinary tribunals, and the work involved
in that. And
as you know from our correspondence, the reserve for that was increasing.
We pride ourself on being a very efficient regulator in terms of our disciplinary
cases. We have a number of in-house counsel lawyers who do the
investigation. So we're proud that we're able to keep our costs
quite low in that regard, our expenses.
And so, in fact, our reserve was getting higher than we needed in terms of the
disciplinary cases. So we often, as part of a cost review, and
perhaps Martin can speak some more to the process, but we're always looking at our
costs and whether we need to
potentially rebalance. So some regulatory authorities just have a
general fee. They don't also have a levy.
The act doesn't require that you have to have it, but for transparency and to be
clear what is funded for the disciplinary functions, we set both as part of
it. And so previously, and I've looked through the
archives actually, and we've reapportioned between disciplinary and
general many times over the years.
In fact, we've done it 2013, '14, '15,
2019. It's a very common practice, and we see that as consistent with
the Office of the Attorney-General's guidelines around making sure you're regularly
reviewing your fees, that they're appropriate and cost recovery.
So that's kind of the process we were undertaking, reviewing to make sure it was at
cost recovery. And we could see the disciplinary was reduced and that that funds
were going too high. Conversely,
the general functions were actually increasing.
And I think in our rationale, we acknowledged perhaps our rationale could have been
a bit clearer on that. Perhaps we did focus a bit more on the disciplinary
balance, but equally, our general costs were going up as
well. Inflationary pressures, we had significant lease
costs, and other factors. So in terms of the rationale, there were
increases in general costs that were there as well.
But just to go back to the point that you
can have a general fee that funds all our functions.
But we're clear, we do it through an APC fee, which does specify a
levy and a general fee. You can put general,
if money in the general can go over to fund disciplinary, but we
don't go the other way. It can't be cross-subsidized the other way.
I just have a question about that. I'll just get in before I come to Miles.
So has the Nursing Council in the past apportioned fees that have been
accrued under the APC and used it for disciplinary
purpose?
Never. I checked into that, and we've never done that.
But we could if we did get some regulatory authority referred to sort of the
million-dollar case, an incredibly expensive and complex case
that is so significant. Or we do get an increase from our
notifications, which are about 407 to, say, we did get 1,000
notifications, unlikely but possible, then yes, we would be able
to use that general to cover over. But we've never done that.
Why do you think that the legislation empowers
you to collect a disciplinary fee,
but that you can use the APC for disciplinary matters?
So the section,
130-
108.
Yeah.
Yeah
Says that you can prescribe fees
in any manner that relates
to anything the authority is required to do and to carry out its functions.
So they're wide grounds for the prescription of fees.
And Section 131 is about a disciplinary levy, so it's
expressed to that. To a certain extent, the point is moot. We've never done that.
We've never gone from one to the other.
Just saying that it's our understanding that that's a possibility,
but we haven't done that. So it's really about the rebalancing.
I'll come to Joseph Mony.
I think Neil-
Neil
... Neil was first.
So, because other organizations don't have the
disciplinary levy described in their acts,
do you feel that you actually need to have that separate
disciplinary levy when
that section you just referred to gives you the ability to?
Well, it's ironic you've said that because this whole process has engendered that
exact discussion of
being here and having these questions.
Our view was transparency, as said in the Office of the Attorney General's
principles.
I think it's important for nurses to know that currently $10 of their
APC goes towards disciplinary functions. It's there.
There's a transparent
bucket for it. There's a transparent mechanism for it.
People know it's there.
So the thinking was actually there's benefits from the principles
of appropriate fee management, that there is a levy that goes
into a levy for disciplinary. It's clearly identified.
It's transparent. You know what you're paying.
But is it the best course of action?
And there are other ways. What would you think, Kath?
I think it is really important to have that level of transparency to the
profession. We're collecting a fee as such,
and so for the profession to know and understand the proportion of that fee
that is run through for disciplinary activities, I think that's important.
Joseph.
Thanks. I think you've answered one of my questions, which was, so you've got
$130 total fee, and then you had a breakdown of 10 cent for the
disciplinary levy and 120 for the APC fee.
That's right.
But then you decided, well, you determined that the $10 was more, you were
accumulating more reserves than you needed. Is that right?
The numbers are slightly off. It went from $23.
Oh, 23.
No, it's $33 to $10.
$10, okay.
Yeah. So the split was
$33.97 became $10.10.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thanks. That's helpful. But you say you want to keep the total fee
at $130.
Yeah.
But the initial quantum that you had for the disciplinary levy was more than you
needed.
Yes.
Why did you think you needed more for your operational expenses rather
than just dropping the total fee overall?
Yeah, and I can address you on that.
So we see a real strong rationale for the increase of the general component.
We had a new six-year lease extension, which was also a 10% increase in
lease premises cost from that year.
We were investing in IT and IT security factors.
We've undertaken strategic project work, including review of nurse prescribing,
nurse practitioner scopes. Been reviewing our standards, including the code of
conduct review. I think there's been well-documented inflationary pressures
for all organizations. So that's a significant cost increase for
everything we do.
And as I think I mentioned, there have been increasing competence cases,
which are non-disciplinary, and these can be quite complex, and so we've noticed an
increase there. So I think there are real key factors for
that justify an increase in our costs.
And I think the key point is that if we had done what you said, which is reduce the
disciplinary levy, but keep that general the same, which was
$97-
... if we had done that, then the council was forecasting a deficit of
$2.1 million. So that was a significant
financial impact in keeping it that way.
Whereas when we did the rebalancing in
$10.10, when we did that,
in fact, the budget was still a deficit of 500,000.
So from an
appropriate cost projection
process, I think that's quite a strong rationale
for doing that. Yeah.
I think that is helpful. Thank you.
All right, Zenon.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So just again, on that, in the letter you sent to us, there was a
line graph for the disciplinary levy reserve projection.
Yep.
And one of the things you said is, "Oh, look, we need more operations, so therefore
reduce the disciplinary levy and to make it the same, but balance
out because we can't cross-subsidize." But in that line graph, you're
seeing a sharp decrease by 2027 in terms
of the disciplinary levy
projection. What happens then if you run it
down to zero?
Yeah.
Then are you looking at year on year, you're going to have to balance and
readjust these two all the time to make sure that
kind of stays the same? And I see that the disciplinary levy reserve projection
has increased and then decreased.
Is there some sort of internal guidelines of what that reserve
should be at for you to comfortably set a levy?
Yes. So if I could, I think there's two parts to that.
So if I can address the first part, which is absolutely.
That review with the line
and ensuring it reaches the appropriate way we see as absolutely
critical and appropriate as per the Office of the Attorney General's
guidelines. It says that you should be regularly reviewing your fee settings to
make sure that it's matching where it should be.
So that matching, and therefore reapportioning, we see
is absolutely in line with best practice.
And indeed, as I think I said in my opening, we've done it many, many times.
I counted back through the archives over about, I think about eight times, perhaps,
where we've undertaken this process of reapportioning to
ensure that it balances and fits within the appropriate
levels. So we see that as
appropriate. And in terms of, I think your second part of the question was around
the-
What's the appropriate amount for a reserve?
Yeah.
So our
view is the appropriate level is somewhere in the one and a half to two million.
Okay.
So as we trend towards that, if we need to reapportion, and
reapportionment might occur at the time of an overall APC increase
as well, at,
depending what the other circumstances are.
Can you just-
A very quick sup- ... In your work of the reapportionment, have you
ever worked on reapportioning overall decrease in the overall levy or the
overall-
Um-
Keeping the proportion, but overall cost decrease? Mm.
No.
As again, I say look through the archives.
So in 2011,
1 March 2011, Nursing Council APC went to $110,
stayed 110 till 2022, when it increased to
$130. So I know that's very efficient and very
much lower than inflation. So those are the two increase
points, 2011 and 2022. During that time we've reapportioned but
always kept it the same. Because remember, the
APC covers our functions of which disciplinary is a component, so these are our
functions. So it's just ensuring that right balance around the
costs,
and trying not to
increase when it's not necessary, so that it is truly cost
recovery. Any thing you wanted to add, Kath?
Is that-
No.
No. Yeah.
No. We might come back to some more questions for you at the end.
Yeah.
But we'll move on to the Pharmacy Council.
Slightly different issue, but
this is a significant levy increase-
Okay
...
for the disciplinary levy.
Do you want to talk us through your correspondence with us about that and
why,
the appropriateness of that for this financial
year?
Yeah, sure. So again, financial year we're talking about is '25,
'26. And thank you very much for the questions.
Really appreciate the opportunity to speak to the point.
Fundamentally, we obviously think it is justified.
The costs are increasing in our disciplinary activity.
And unfortunately, as you also rightly picked up on, or we have
acknowledged, our reserves have been getting particularly low.
Reserves, of course, are there for emergency purposes.
Not having that reserve becomes very dangerous, in terms of maintaining
our financial sustainability.
We do have a prescribed policy to the level of our reserve, and we say
for the disciplinary in particular, we have a 200K reserve.
We have a smaller scale of numbers, so 200K is quite significant for us,
in terms of an RA.
The cost and what we're seeing in our disciplinary activity, and has been
proved. At the time we proposed that fee increase,
you may have noted that we both proposed the fee increase for
that financial year and the financial year that we're currently in.
So this financial year has remained the same, consistent.
So we were effectively looking for two years to give the
profession the certainty of fees, which we had heard as being
really important to them. In terms of the magnitude, what's going on is
disciplinary activity, is constantly going like that.
And as much as we were forecasting the numbers, the actual results have
proved our forecast was correct, if you like.
Correct in the sense of that activity did go greater than we expected,
both in terms of number of cases at the lower risk
end, as well as the number of cases at the more
complex end. Although few, but in terms of complex, what we're
referring to there is the fact that our practitioners'
cases are tending to be more and more complex in
the sense of the pressures within the workforce are
coming through in our practitioners, and we see insights
starting to evaporate a little bit.
We start to get a mixture of conduct issues and
health worries or wellness issues starting to mix into that,
and the extent of legal
people employed to assist them. The better lawyers often
then, A, are more expensive, and B,
often cause the cases to be
progressed in a much more process-orientated rather than the intention of the
act in terms of a much more educative-
Understood
... process as such.
Just a couple of clarifying questions before I come to Dr. Junan.
Is this new? Are you seeing this mostly with new pharmacists?
Is that-
No, not necessarily.
Okay.
It's across the board. As much as I'm saying we're having this,
there's not a lot. We're talking at our more complex end,
we're talking about 20 cases-
Yeah
... in that complex end.
Right.
Relative to the number of pharmacists that are practicing, about
4,500 to 4,800
practicing pharmacists. So we're talking at the minority end, but still
expensive and still increasing in the numbers that we're having to deal with.
Okay. And just to clarify, did you consider other
ways to balance the cost? The correspondence that you've had from us
picks up on this issue that,
is it fair to, and is it empowered by the
law to spread the future costs,
well, the costs that exist now, that have run down the disciplinary
budget over new entrants into the pharmacy profession?
So okay. And we'd like to see that reserve is there for emergency.
Yeah.
It's not necessarily meeting past costs.
And again, it's more going forward.
So it's more thinking about going forward.
What gives us comfort, I understand your worry, and it's one that we
certainly spend time thinking about, and again, like nursing, we
follow the Office Auditor General guidelines, treasury guidelines,
and our auditors review this process as well, if you like.
And in respect to this area, again, what gives us comfort is
we
see a very few number
coming into the profession, net new numbers.
So we're talking about 100 to 200 new practitioners
a yearSo intergenerational pricing
issues are relatively small. The administrative costs
associated with trying to apportion, particularly to new
versus old, if you like,
would outweighs the benefit of what you're trying to achieve by doing it.
Do you agree with the Nursing Council that you could use your general fees to
subsidize your disciplinary fees?
We never use it to subsidize. The point I'd emphasize is it's
cashflow management. So we never subsidize general activities for
disciplinary activities or vice versa.
Yeah.
What we are effectively doing is using the reserves for cashflow purposes.
Okay.
And so yes, I agree with Nursing from a
cashflow management point of view.
We may well use the cash that's sitting there for a general purpose
for the cash that's required for a disciplinary purpose.
You mean within a financial year or across financial years?
In
the main, it's within the financial year.
Certainly-
Right
... at the end of the financial year, they're again balanced out.
Yeah.
The important part is the practitioners that are involved in the general are the
same practitioners that are in the disciplinary.
So once again, we're not
cross-subsidizing between particular practitioners as such, which is, again,
why we don't have a concern. That is a concern when some RAs have
different professionals in each of those buckets-
Yeah
... crudely, if you like. So again, we think we're doing the best thing
both for the practitioners and for good cashflow management, and
emergency preparedness.
Dr. Janan.
Thank you.
What a softball.
Go. Yeah.
Joseph.
We have similar questions.
Yeah. Mine was only, but I'm just
teasing out the reserve a little bit more.
Sure.
And I appreciate you're trying to-
Yeah
... on one side balance your existing reserves-
Yes
... and what have been built up over time by-
... existing members.
If that's the right word.
Registrants is where we tend, yep.
Registrants. Versus your projected costs-
Yes
... in the industry and you're trying to balance those two things at the same time.
So I'm just trying to understand this because
one of the key concerns we want to try and understand is
whether you're
putting effectively an unfair cost burden on new entrants
because the reserves haven't been
adequate
for the projected increase. So, and I
appreciate it's a bit of a moving feast trying to work these things through-
Yeah
... including intellectually.
Yeah.
But I'm just interested, what is an appropriate level of funding in
your reserves over the last few years,
roughly speaking, versus what your predicted costs going forward are?
So we're always trying to keep the reserve at about 200K.
So that's our policy point for, we're predicting that if
we get our forecasting wrong, for example, and we have a case
that requires legal costs to be met, we need that
200K. So it's there for a reserve. Or some form of natural disaster,
et cetera, it needs to help for that purpose.
In terms of then the cost between the periods, no, and
increasingly that's less of a concern because
increasingly there's very few costs that are moved between financial
years. The only challenge in the disciplinary space is
some of our cases might start in this financial year, but then they don't get
resolved until they're in this financial year.
And so yes, there's a set of costs that are going across those two
years that may get borne over here.
But again, I then come back to the fact that we only have
100 to 200
per annum of new entrants into the
profession. And so the number we're talking about is relatively
low, that we might have some form of cost that
they're having to bear
that may not be truly theirs, if you like.
So the concern that you won't have enough reserves, did you drop below the
$200,000?
We have, absolutely. We're in the negative on our disciplinary reserve.
How far in the negative are you on that?
Exactly at this moment.
It's about 170.
170. 170.
What happened there? Because that's obviously been a pretty $350,000 difference.
Just because we're in this two-year period, if you like, and the costs
are going like this, greater than our projection.
Right.
And so we still have to meet that activity, and therefore we've got, as I was
alluding to earlier, is we've got to cash flow manage that.
And so it's nothing more than a cash flow to here, and then recognizing
that the reserve needs to get back to at least zero,
ideally back to 200.
When did you last have the reserve at the preferred
$200,000?
It's been in a positive space probably-
A while back
... yeah, it's a wee while back now, actually. Yeah.
Would you be able to get us that?
Sorry?
Yes, I can certainly supply that detail.
Dr. Janan.
Thank you, because actually that's kind of on the same line of
the first question I was going to ask.
This is not a new issue, sounds like, for the Pharmacy Council
in terms of a depleting or depleted reserve.
So why has it only been increased now to address what
seems to be
a reasonably long-term depletion?
Yes,
a valid comment. And I guess what I would
probably be comfortable in is the fact that, again, we're talking about
largely the same practitioners, bar about 100 or so.
So whether it's the general that's cash flowing or the disciplinary that's cash
flowing, we're still talking from a practitioner point of
view. They pay the same total fee.
It's a total fee that is made up of disciplinary and
APC.
Yeah.
And we just move between those two fees, if you like,
to help support whichever reserve.
And so again, from an administrative point of view, we
don't stress over it because there isn't huge
intergenerational, nor is there sharing costs between those two
buckets, crudely.
But even internally, if the APC is consistent for the
registrant, so they're not affected-But
internally, surely at some point you'll be like, "Oh, look, that's depleted quite
significantly," but we won't worry about it, despite the fact you can't process
loans.
We are worrying about it. We constantly worry about it.
Okay.
And that's why in our consultation material on this,
we actually alluded to the fact we do, under the Health Practitioners Competence
Assurance Act, have the ability to go out and change that disciplinary
levy during the course of the financial year.
But once again, we were trying to ensure we keep the fee as moderate as
possible in totality-
Mm-hmm
... and try and live within our means as much as possible,
and not always predict the worst case scenario.
Mm-hmm.
Unfortunately, we're on the edge of wondering whether we may well have
to make that adjustment for exactly the reason you're alluding to.
I'm going to come to the Honorable Jenny Salesa, and then we'll thank you for your
time.
Yeah.
Is the increase in 55% usual or is it the highest ever?
And how often do you increase the levy?
Pharmacy Council has had, I
guess, to its detriment at times, again,
not always increased the fee.
And that's perhaps the difficulty that we have been guilty of,
is that we try and make sure we're not being too harsh
in our fees, if you like, even though costs are increasing.
Yes.
We're no different than any other organization in this room as such.
Yeah. And appreciate that, absolutely.
We have been interested in fees and really want to acknowledge that both
organizations here set a fee and have done what the
legislation asks you to do, which is to set a clear fee, and now you're managing
that, and it's really helpful that you have been able to speak to these issues.
Thank you. That's all we've got time for, but we will-
Thank you so much
... write back to you.
Thank you. Awesome. Thank you. Good questions. Appreciate it.
Send more questions